---
title: "Logistic planet"
date: 2024-05-20T16:20:01-07:00
draft: false
---

The Apache helicopter is a beautiful machine. A sloped brow thickens vertically into an oblong thorax, flanked by narrow horizontal fins that carry a destructive ability orders above human scale. The thorax tapers to a lithe tail long again as its body capped by a triangular fin. In flight, viewed from behind, its rotors are nearly invisible, existing mostly as a mental footnote to explain the technical wonder in progress. Look at a hawk for a moment and its flight is immediately legible as such. The Apache's insectine body moves through the air in an entirely different way, pitching and yawing about its center impossibly fast, as if unbound by the same laws that lift the hawk and carry it smoothly across an updraft. Apart from a few upgrades to weapons and guidance systems, its form has been more or less unchanged since 1975. Like the crocodile, whose genetic heritage has scarcely changed since before the meteor strike that wiped out the dinosaurs, it is a perfect predator. 

Growing up in the '00s and '10s, I learned to view a piece of technology as a snapshot of an infinite trajectory under constant acceleration. Nearly every specification should move in the direction of convenience at an exponential rate. Moore's Law predicts that the density of transistors on a computer chip will double every two years. For my entire conscious existence, from the age of seven or so, that expectation was more or less borne out. 

Of course, Moore's Law can't actually be true forever. Things can only get so small, and electrical circuits become a lot harder to manage when you have to think about interference from quantum physics. Computers are almost at that point now. A few years ago the trend in graphics processors was towards miniaturization: the real value proposition for most people wasn't the biggest newest one but the midrange card that could eke out comparable performance to last year's flagship at half size and half the thermal design power (TDP). The last few generations have moved away from this trend. Size and TDP for even midrange cards have increased dramatically. NVIDIA's RTX 5080 is expected to draw more power and cost more than my entire PC with a comparable-level card from just four years ago. 

Earth, being a finite place, rarely hosts systems that grow exponentially. On a long enough timescale, almost everything here that looks exponential turns out to be logistic. A logistic curve starts at zero, and at some point begins to grow with an acceleration that suggests exponential growth. Then, suddenly, its growth rate slows precipitously and the curve flattens under a horizontal asymptote - a glass ceiling, if you will. The simplest curve resembles an S-shape turned about 30 degrees clockwise, and it describes the dynamics of almost every living population we've observed long enough in a habitat with a finite carrying capacity. If you zoom in on just the right window of time, you would be forgiven for mistaking a logistic curve for an exponential one. But if you're patient and sober-minded (and your annual bonus doesn't depend on pumping out optimistic forecasts), even Moore's Law will hew closer to logistic. 

A surprising amount of modern technology is built on first-order approximations - essentially, taking the current rate of change associated with a phenomenon and projecting it as a straight line into the future. It's worked out pretty well for us so far, but nature's nonlinearity sometimes creates soft constraints that throw our naive predictions for a loop. The "square-cube law" is one example. As the height or length of a living creature increases linearly, its surface area increases quadratically and its volume (and thus its mass) tend to increase cubically. It turns out that the evolutionary fitness of a vertebrate's skeletal structure has a local maximum  from the size of a hamster to a VW Golf. On land, with current oxygen levels and Earth's particular gravity, fitness tapers off dramatically as animals grow much beyond hatchback size. Meat just gets too heavy for bones to support its weight. In the ocean, where gravity is less pronounced, a different set of constraints apply, resulting in deep-sea gigantism and allowing creatures like the giant squid and blue whale to flourish.   

In the '10s, relying on the first-order approximations of tech optimists was a recipe for disappointment. Peter Thiel famously lamented that we "were promised flying cars, but we got 140 characters." Thiel and others like him turn this truth into a blame game, pointing the finger at their political heels like new hiring practices and "green" public investment standards. But perhaps there's another square-cube law here that creates a chilling effect on further technical progress in this era of tech. We may have been wrong to look at the rate of tech development in the 1990s and expect flying cars at all. In the field of machine learning, the new scaling laws require an ever-increasing amount of computational resources to drive further performance improvements. We're so past the point of diminishing returns that tech companies are starting to build datacenters with on-site nuclear power plants to meet some of their astronomical power demand. Perhaps, not unlike the Apache, information processing is close to maturity. It would certainly appear so from the increasingly speculative venture-funded, hype-based tech ideas that dominated the tech atmosphere in the last four years. Advances in computer hardware and telecommunications from the 1950s to the 1990s created a fertile "business habitat", and IT may be reaching the upper asymptote of its logistic growth. 

We understand perfectly well that other living systems are constrained in their growth. But we have a bit of a blind spot when it comes to ourselves and the machines we build. It's partially because we've never been near global carrying capacity, and so never confronted our own asymptote. But look at the trends in crop productivity and you'll understand that our current food system only has so much room to grow - it too is constrained by finite space and competition with the ever-growing human population. There's little convincing evidence for the scalability of new agricultural technologies like hydroponics and vertical farming, so there's no reason to believe the magical thinking that some innovation will come and save us at the last minute. Of course, exponential returns can still happen on a logistic planet in the short-term. But just like one bacterial population overtaking another in a petri dish, the returns are zero-sum. The whole biomass on the dish is constrained.

Taken together, logistic growth explains much of the incoherence that defines this moment. Our cultural, social and technocratic institutions, which together comprise what I call the "symbolic world", have all tied themselves into the same network and legitimize one another self-referentially. A successful existence in the bubble they circumscribe - investment in a home paying off, or individual retirement, for instance - is essentially predicated on perpetual growth at an increasing rate. The entire symbolic economy rests on mathematical models that are calibrated to expect the entire stock market to return 8-10% each year. As the impossibility of such growth becomes clear, the messages coming out of the symbolic world become more and more obviously incoherent.  

While we were on ther upswing part of the logistic curve, this mismatch was much easier to ignore. But it's becoming increasingly clear that a different model, one where firms act on behalf of the state and marked by more explicit state control and a public-private oligarchy, is winning out, even according to the arbitrary metrics the symbolic world defines. China is ten years ahead of the American electric vehicle industry, and all signs point to the US government ramping up protectionism. Ironic - the inventors of globalism are gearing up for a total reversal once it no longer benefits our firms. At the very least, it'll be interesting to see how our superstructure responds to these new competitive pressures. One can only hope that they will meet the moment and understand that another epoch of growth will require more public investment into boring hard tech and infrastructure instead of buying into their own hype. 


The fantasy that we can keep it together is attractive to the symbolic world because its constituents, a relatively small group of private firms and people, rely on the continuation of this economic model. Their world rests on the state's constant administration of the market on behalf of their capital interests. 



In a way, contrary to what think-piece authors love to crow, Francis Fukuyama was right. The 1990s really were the end of a particular history - one where a confluence of small factors led to a uniquely fertile habitat for economic growth. Once we let go if that history, we can finally get around to building the future.  
